.\" Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
.\" Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" This document is dual-licensed.  You may distribute and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of either of the following licenses:
.\"
.\" * The GNU General Public License, as published by the Free Software
.\"   Foundation, version 3 or (at your option) any later version.  You
.\"   should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"   along with this program.  If not, see
.\"   <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" * The GNU Free Documentation License, as published by the Free
.\"   Software Foundation, version 1.2 or (at your option) any later
.\"   version, with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no
.\"   Back-Cover Texts.  You should have received a copy of the GNU Free
.\"   Documentation License along with this program.  If not, see
.\"   <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\" $Id: pinotrc.5 4533 2011-02-24 02:14:30Z astyanax $
.TH PINOTRC 5 "version 0.0.7" "August 3, 2014"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.SH NAME
pinotrc \- pinot's rcfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page briefly documents \fBpinot\fP's rcfile.
.PP
\fBpinot\fP is a small, free and friendly editor which aims to replace
GNU nano for developers. It removes some of nano's general text-editing
features by default (particularly the spell checker and text justification)
while adding some developer-friendly features like PCRE regular expressions.
.PP
The \fIpinotrc\fP file contains the default settings for \fBpinot\fP.  It
should not be in DOS or Mac format.  During startup, \fBpinot\fP will
first read its system-wide settings from \fISYSCONFDIR/pinotrc\fP, and
then user-specific settings from \fI~/.pinotrc\fP.

.SH OPTIONS
The configuration file accepts a series of \fBset\fP and \fBunset\fP
commands, which can be used to configure pinot on startup without using
the command line options.  Additionally, the \fBsyntax\fP, \fBcolor\fP,
and \fBicolor\fP keywords are used to define syntax highlighting rules
for different text patterns.  \fBpinot\fP will read one command per line.
.PP
Options in \fIpinotrc\fP files take precedence over pinot's defaults, and
command-line options override \fIpinotrc\fP settings.  Also, options that
do not take an argument are unset by default.  So using the \fBunset\fR
command is only needed when wanting to override a setting of the system's
\fIpinotrc\fR file in your own \fB~/.pinotrc\fR.  Options that take an
argument cannot be unset.
.PP
Below, the \fIstring\fR parameters need to be enclosed in double quotes.
Quotes inside these string parameters don't have to be escaped with
backslashes.  The last double quote in the string will be treated as its
end.  For example, for the \fBbrackets\fP option, "\fI"')>]}\fP" will
match \fI"\fP, \fI'\fP, \fI)\fP, \fI>\fP, \fI]\fP, and \fI}\fP.
.PP
The supported commands and arguments are:

.TP 3
.B set allow_insecure_backup
When backing up files, allow the backup to succeed even if its permissions
can't be (re)set due to special OS considerations.  You should 
NOT enable this option unless you are sure you need it.
.TP
.B set autoindent
Use auto-indentation.
.TP
.B set backup
Create backup files in \fIfilename~\fP.
.TP
.B set backupdir "\fIdirectory\fP"
Set the directory where \fBpinot\fP puts unique backup files if file
backups are enabled.
.TP
.B set backwards
Do backwards searches by default.
.TP
.B set boldtext
Use bold text instead of reverse video text.
.TP
.B set brackets "\fIstring\fP"
Set the characters treated as closing brackets when justifying
paragraphs.  They cannot contain blank characters.  Only closing
punctuation, optionally followed by closing brackets, can end sentences.
The default value is "\fI"')>]}\fP".
.TP
.B set casesensitive
Do case sensitive searches by default.
.TP
.B set const
Constantly display the cursor position in the status bar.
.TP
.B set cut
Use cut to end of line by default.
.TP
.B set fill \fInumber\fR
Hard-wrap lines at column number \fInumber\fR.  If \fInumber\fR is 0 or less,
the maximum line length will be the screen width less \fInumber\fP columns.
The default value is \fB\-8\fR.
.TP
.B set functioncolor \fIfgcolor\fR,\fIbgcolor\fR
Specify the color combination to use for the function descriptions
in the two help lines at the bottom of the screen.
See \fBset titlecolor\fR for more details.
.TP
.B set historylog
Enable \fI~/.pinot/search_history\fP for saving and reading search/replace
strings.
.TP
.B set keycolor \fIfgcolor\fR,\fIbgcolor\fR
Specify the color combination to use for the shortcut key combos
in the two help lines at the bottom of the screen.
See \fBset titlecolor\fR for more details.
.TP
.B set locking
Enable vim-style lock-files for when editing files.
.TP
.B set matchbrackets "\fIstring\fP"
Set the opening and closing brackets that can be found by bracket
searches.  They cannot contain blank characters.  The former set must
come before the latter set, and both must be in the same order.  The
default value is "\fI(<[{)>]}\fP".
.TP
.B set morespace
Use the blank line below the titlebar as extra editing space.
.TP
.B set multibuffer
When reading in a file with ^R, insert it into a new buffer by default.
.TP
.B set noconvert
Don't convert files from DOS/Mac format.
.TP
.B set nofollow
Don't follow symlinks when writing files.
.TP
.B set nohelp
Don't display the help lists at the bottom of the screen.
.TP
.B set nonewlines
Don't add newlines to the ends of files.
.TP
.B set nowrap
Toggle whether long lines will be wrapped to the next line.
.TP
.B set poslog
Save the cursor position of files between editing sessions.
.TP
.B set preserve
Preserve the XON and XOFF keys (^Q and ^S).
.TP
.B set quiet
\fBpinot\fP will not report errors in the \fIpinotrc\fP file and ask them
to be acknowledged by pressing enter at startup.  If this is used it
should be placed at the top of the file to be fully effective.
.TP
.B set quickblank
Do quick statusbar blanking.  Statusbar messages will disappear after 1
keystroke instead of 25.
.TP
.B set rebindkeypad
Interpret the numeric keypad keys so that they all work properly.  You
should only need to use this option if they don't, as mouse support
won't work properly with this option enabled.
.TP
.B set regexp
Do extended regular expression searches by default.
.TP
.B set smarthome
Make the Home key smarter.  When Home is pressed anywhere but at the
very beginning of non-whitespace characters on a line, the cursor will
jump to that beginning (either forwards or backwards).  If the cursor is
already at that position, it will jump to the true beginning of the
line.
.TP
.B set smooth
Use smooth scrolling by default.
.TP
.B set softwrap
Enable soft line wrapping for easier viewing of very long lines.
.TP
.B set speller "\fIspellprog\fP"
Use spelling checker \fIspellprog\fP instead of the built-in one, which
calls \fIspell\fP.
.TP
.B set statuscolor \fIfgcolor\fR,\fIbgcolor\fR
Specify the color combination to use for the statusbar.
See \fBset titlecolor\fR for more details.
.TP
.B set suspend
Allow \fBpinot\fP to be suspended.
.TP
.B set tabsize \fIn\fP
Use a tab size of \fInumber\fR columns.  The value of \fInumber\fP must be
greater than 0.  The default value is \fB8\fR.
.TP
.B set tabstospaces
Convert typed tabs to spaces.
.TP
.B set tempfile
Save automatically on exit, don't prompt.
.TP
 .B set titlecolor \fIfgcolor\fR,\fIbgcolor\fR
Specify the color combination to use for the titlebar.
Valid color names for foreground and background are:
.BR white , \ black , \ red , \ blue , \ green , \ yellow , \ magenta ", and " cyan .
And either "\fIfgcolor\fR" or ",\fIbgcolor\fR" may be left out.
.TP
.B set view
Disallow file modification.
.TP
.B set whitespace "\fIstring\fP"
Set the two characters used to display the first characters of tabs and
spaces.  They must be single-column characters.
.TP
.B set wordbounds
Detect word boundaries more accurately by treating punctuation
characters as parts of words.
.TP
.B syntax "\fIstr\fP" ["\fIfileregex\fP" ... ]
Defines a syntax named \fIstr\fP which can be activated via the
\-Y/\-\-syntax command line option, or will be automatically activated if
the current filename matches the extended regular expression
\fIfileregex\fP.  All subsequent \fBcolor\fR, \fBicolor\fR,
\fBheader\fR and other such statements will apply to this
\fIstr\fP syntax until a new \fBsyntax\fR command is encountered.

The \fInone\fP syntax is reserved; specifying it on the command line is
the same as not having a syntax at all.  The \fIdefault\fP syntax is
special: it takes no \fIfileregex\fP, and applies to files that don't
match any syntax's \fIfileregex\fP.
.TP
.BI linter " program " \fR[ "arg " \fR...]
Use the given \fIprogram\fR to run a syntax check on the current file
(this overrides the speller function when defined).
.TP
.BI formatter " program " \fR[ "arg " \fR...]
Use the given \fIprogram\fR to automatically reformat text.
Useful in certain programming languages (e.g. Go).
.TP
.BR header " \fIregex\fR " ...
Add one or more regexes which will be compared against the very first line
of the file to be edited, to determine whether this syntax should be used
for that file.
.TP
.B magic ["\fIregex\fP" ... ]
Add one or more regexes which will becompared against the \fBmagic\fP
database when attempting to determine which highlighting rules to use for a
given file. This functionality only works when \fBlibmagic\fP is installed
on the system and will be silently ignored otherwise.
.TP
.B extends "\fIstr\fP"
Extend the syntax previously defined as \fIstr\fP to include
new information.  This allows you to add a new \fBcolor\fP, \fBicolor\fP,
\fBheader\fP, \fBmagic\fP, \fBlinter\fP, or \fBformatter\fP directive
to an already defined syntax -- useful when you want to
slightly improve a syntax defined in one of the system-installed
files (which are normally not writable)
.TP
.B color \fIfgcolor\fP,\fIbgcolor\fP "\fIregex\fP" ...
Display all pieces of text that match the extended regular expression
\fIregex\fP with foreground color \fIfgcolor\fP and background color
\fIbgcolor\fP, at least one of which must be specified.
Valid colors for foreground and background are:
white, black, red, blue, green, yellow, magenta, and cyan.
You may use the prefix "bright" to get a stronger color highlight for
the foreground.  If your terminal supports transparency, not specifying a
\fIbgcolor\fP tells \fBnano\fP to attempt to use a transparent
background.
.TP
.B icolor \fIfgcolor\fP,\fIbgcolor\fP "\fIregex\fP" ...
Same as above, except that the text matching is case insensitive.
.TP
.B color \fIfgcolor\fP,\fIbgcolor\fP start="\fIsr\fP" end="\fIer\fP"
Display all pieces of text whose start matches extended regular expression
\fIsr\fP and whose end matches extended regular expression \fIer\fP with
foreground color \fIfgcolor\fP and background color \fIbgcolor\fP,
at least one of which must be specified.  This means that, after an
initial instance of \fIsr\fP, all text will be highlighted until the
first instance of \fIer\fP.  This allows syntax highlighting to span
multiple lines.
.TP
.B icolor \fIfgcolor\fP,\fIbgcolor\fP start="\fIsr\fP" end="\fIer\fP"
Same as above, except that the text matching is case insensitive.
.TP
.B include "\fIsyntaxfile\fP"
Read in self-contained color syntaxes from \fIsyntaxfile\fP.  Note that
\fIsyntaxfile\fP may contain only the above commands, from \fBsyntax\fP
to \fBicolor\fP.
.SH KEY BINDINGS
Key bindings may be reassigned via the following commands:
.TP
.BI bind \fIkey\fP \fIfunction\fP  \fImenu\fP
Rebinds the key \fIkey\fP to a new function named \fIfunction\fP in the
context of menu \fImenu\fP (or in all menus where the function exists
by using \fBall\fP).
.TP
.BI unbind " key menu"
Unbinds the key \fIkey\fP from the menu named \fImenu\fP (or from all
menus where it exists by using \fBall\fP).

.TP
The format of \fIkey\fP should be one of:
.TP
.B ^ 
followed by an alpha character or the word "Space".
Example: ^C
.TP
.B M- 
followed by a printable character or the word "Space".
Example: M-C
.TP
.B F 
followed by a numeric value from 1 to 16.
Example: F10
.TP

Valid \fIfunction\fP names to be bound include:
.TP 2
.B help
Invoke the help menu.
.TP
.B cancel
Cancel the current command.
.TP
.B exit
Exit from the program.
.TP
.B writeout
Write the current buffer to disk.
.TP
.B justify
Justify the current text.
.TP
.B insert
Inserts a file into the current buffer (at the current cursor position),
or into a new buffer when option \fBmultibuffer\fR is set.
.TP
.B whereis
Search for text in the current buffer, or filenames matching a string in the
current list in the file browser.
.TP
.B searchagain
Repeat the last search command.
.TP
.B up
Move up in the editor or browser.
.TP
.B down
Move down in the editor or browser.
.TP
.B left
Move left in the editor or browser.
.TP
.B right
Move right in the editor or browser.
.TP
.B cut
Cut the current line of text and store it.
.TP
.B uncut
Copy the currently stored text into the current buffer position.
.TP
.B cutrestoffile
Cut all text from the cursor position till the end of the buffer.
.TP
.B curpos
Show the current cursor position: the line, column, and character positions.
.TP
.B speller
Invoke a spell checking program (or a linting program, if the current
syntax highlighting defines one).
.TP
.B firstline
Move to the first line of the file.
.TP
.B lastline
Move to the last line of the file.
.TP
.B gotoline
Move to a specific line (and column if specified).
.TP
.B gototext
Switch between targeting a line number and searching for text.
.TP
.B replace
Interactively replace text within the current buffer.
.TP
.B mark
Begin selecting text for cutting or pasting at the current position.
.TP
.B copytext
Copy the currently marked text without deleting it.
.TP
.B indent
Indent the currently marked text (shift to the right).
.TP
.B unindent
Un-indent the currently marked text (shift to the left).
.TP
.B nextword
Move the cursor to the beginning of the next word.
.TP
.B prevword
Move the cursor to the beginning of the previous word.
.TP
.B home
Move the cursor to the beginning of the current line.
.TP
.B end
Move the cursor to the end of the current line.
.TP
.B beginpara
Move the cursor to the beginning of the current paragraph.
.TP
.B endpara
Move the cursor to the end of the current paragraph.
.TP
.B findbracket
Move the cursor to the matching bracket (brace, parenthesis, etc.) of the one
under the cursor.
.TP
.B scrollup
Scroll up one line of text from the current position.
.TP
.B scrolldown
Scroll down one line of text from the current position.
.TP
.B prevbuf
Switches to editing/viewing the previous buffer when multiple buffers are open.
.TP
.B nextbuf
Switches to editing/viewing the next buffer when multiple buffers are open.
.TP
.B verbatim
Insert the next character verbatim into the file.
.TP
.B tab
Insert a tab at the current cursor location.
.TP
.B enter
Insert a new line below the current one.
.TP
.B delete
Delete the character under the cursor.
.TP
.B backspace
Delete the character before the cursor.
.TP
.B fulljustify
Justify the entire current file.
.TP
.B wordcount
Count the number of words in the current buffer.
.TP
.B refresh
Refresh the screen.
.TP
.B undo
Undo the text action peformed (add text, delete text, etc).
.TP
.B redo
Redo the last undone action (i.e., undo an undo).
.TP
.B suspend
Suspend the editor (if the suspend function is enabled, see the 
"suspendenable" entry below).
.TP
.B casesens
Toggle case sensitivity in searching (search/replace menus only).
.TP
.B regexp
Toggle whether searching/replacing is based on literal strings or regular expressions.
.TP
.B backwards
Toggle whether searching/replacing goes forward or backward.
.TP
.B prevhistory
Show the previous history entry in the prompt menus (e.g. search).
.TP
.B nexthistory
Show the next history entry in the prompt menus (e.g. search).
.TP
.B togglereplace
Toggles between searching for something and replacing something.
.TP
.B toggleexecute
Toggles between inserting a file and executing a command.
.TP
.B togglenewbuffer
Toggles between inserting into the current buffer and into a new empty buffer.
.TP
.B tofiles
Starts the file browser, allowing a file to be selected from a list.
.TP
.B gotodir
Goes to a directory.
.TP
.B dosformat
When writing a file, switch to writing a DOS format (CR/LF).
.TP
.B macformat
When writing a file, switch to writing a Mac format.
.TP
.B append
When writing a file, append to the end instead of overwriting.
.TP
.B prepend
When writing a file, 'prepend' (write at the beginning) instead of overwriting.
.TP
.B backup
When writing a file, create a backup of the current file. 
.TP
.B firstfile
Move to the first file when using the file browser (reading or writing files).
.TP
.B lastfile
Move to the last file when using the file browser (reading or writing files).
.TP
.B nohelp
Toggle showing/hiding the two-line list of key bindings at the bottom of the screen.
.TP
.B constupdate
Toggle the constant display the current line, column, and word positions.
.TP
.B morespace
Toggle showing/hiding the blank line which 'separates' the 'title' from the file text.
.TP
.B smoothscroll
Toggle smooth scrolling when moving via the arrow keys.
.TP
.B whitespacedisplay
Toggle the showing of "whitespace" characters.
.TP
.B nosyntax
Toggle syntax highlighting.
.TP
.B smarthome
Toggle whether the smart home key function is enabled.
.TP
.B autoindent
Toggle whether new lines will contain the same amount of whitespace as the line above.
.TP
.B cuttoend
Toggle whether cutting text will cut the whole line or just from the current cursor
position to the end of the line.
.TP
.B nowrap
Toggle whether long lines will be wrapped to the next line.
.TP
.B tabstospaces
Toggle whether typed tabs will be converted to spaces.
.TP
.B backupfile
Toggle whether a backup will be made of the file to be edited.
.TP
.B multibuffer
Toggles whether a file is inserted into the current buffer
or read into a new buffer.
.TP
.B noconvert
Toggle automatic conversion of files from DOS/Mac format.
.TP
.B suspendenable
Toggle whether the suspend sequence (normally ^Z) will suspend the editor window.
.TP

Valid \fImenu\fP sections are:
.TP 2
.B main
The main editor window where text is entered.
.TP
.B search
The search menu (AKA whereis).
.TP
.B replace
The 'search to replace' menu.
.TP
.B replacewith
The 'replace with' menu, which comes up after 'search to replace'.
.TP
.B gotoline
The 'goto line (and column)' menu.
.TP
.B writeout
The 'write file' menu.
.TP
.B insert
The 'insert file' menu.
.TP
.B extcmd
The menu for inserting output from an external comman, reached from the insert menu.
.TP
.B help
The help menu.
.TP
.B spell
The interactive spell checker Yes/no menu.
.TP
.B browser
The file browser for inserting or writing a file.
.TP
.B whereisfile
The 'search for a file' menu in the file browser.
.TP
.B gotodir
The 'go to directory' menu.
.TP
.B all
A special name that encompasses all menus.
For \fBbind\fR it means all menus where the specified \fIfunction\fR exists;
for \fBunbind\fR it means all menus where the specified \fIkey\fR exists.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I SYSCONFDIR/pinotrc
System-wide configuration file
.TP
.I ~/.pinotrc
Per-user configuration file
.SH SEE ALSO
.PD 0
.TP
\fBpinot\fP(1)
.PP
\fI/usr/share/doc/pinot/examples/pinotrc.sample\fP (or equivalent on your
system)
.SH AUTHOR
Chris Allegretta <chrisa@asty.org>, et al (see \fIAUTHORS\fP and
\fITHANKS\fP for details).  This manual page was originally written by
Jordi Mallach <jordi@gnu.org>, for the Debian system (but may be used by
others).
